---
layout: post
title:  "2. Who is a Human?"
date:   2019-08-28 12:15:00 +1000
---


These ramblings are inspired by the conversation between Nikola Danilow aka Singularity.FM and prof. Steve Fuller. Hear it at [Singularity Weblog](https://www.singularityweblog.com/steve-fuller/). 

In discussions about the future it is not uncommon to hear the parties trying to define what it means to be a human. While it seems important, or at least interesting, to have a definition I strongly believe that it is futile to try to come up with one that is based on some absolute parameters, be it IQ, carbon content, or emotions and desires. Any such definition will not hold in the long term.

Please note the question is who *is* a human, not who *is treated* as a human. Defining who is treated as a human is easy - it's the entity which is treated as a human, in a given context (for example: do human rights apply?). There are humans today who are not treated as humans. 

As of 2019 the definition of a human is biological - it simply is being [homo sapiens](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homo_sapiens). 
It’s worth noting that modifications are OK. A human can have:
modified, transplanted, or removed organs;
implants, including electronic implants;
and bionic prosthetics.

I believe that as technology advances (i.e. evolution speeds up) the definition of a human will become social, and less biological; as it was in the past. Being human will be defined by the bonds. It will mirror definitions of nationhood, parenthood or belonging to any social group. Who is a Pole, an Australian, a mother, or a Maori? [מיהו יהודי](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Who_is_a_Jew%3F) 

I would define being human as meeting the following two criteria:

H1. Being classified as human by a significant part of the main group that currently is human;

H2. Not being a non-human. 

where:
* significant is important × many;
* main group is the leading civilisation. In a case where there are many important groups of humans e.g. on Mars and on Earth and they disagree then an entity could be a human and non-human at the same time, depending on who’s answering. 
* H2 covers scenarios of impersonification. An example would be an alien who sits in an artificial human body and it appears to humans as human.  

This definition doesn't deal with the outsider's view of humanity. Dogs and aliens have their own definitions of humans.

At some stage the modifications to the human body may be considered significant enough that a new subspecies or species will be declared. If this new group is human or not will surely be the subject of a great debate, but eventually it will become history and one opinion will prevail. These modified or extened humans will either be considered humans or not.   

It’s worth pointing out that it is not contradictory to be a human from current perspective and to not be a human at a point it history/future (from the perspective of a past/future generation). This is common in history and there have been many groups who were not considered human and became human, for example slaves and many indigenous peoples. It’s entirely possible that cyborgs, uploaded minds, and descendants of first Martians will be considered respectively out, out, in and for this to later change. 

If the definition of a human is social how does one become human? 
This is achieved through assimilation: 
(A) Humans accepts you and/or
(B) You force your way into humanity, via argumentation or violence.
In practical term paths A and B happen often is parallel and they reinforce each other. 

*Side note: 
Previous generations have been considered cruel because they treated other humans badly - I don't think it was like this - I think they genuinely thought (AND felt) of others as non-humans.*

In summary, as humans change being a human will become more and more a social concept, as was in the past. Who is a human will be decided by societies, and it will be defined by politicians and lawyers rather than by scientists. 


