---
layout: post
title:  "3. Go Lang Slices"
date:   2024-08-18 09:06:00 +1000
---

I'm learning [Go](https://go.dev/) (not [Go](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Go_(game))) and this article shows a number of possible gotchas around the core data type in Go, the slice. Nothing in this article is advanced or profound and every scenario shown here is trivial. 

### Problem

From the beginning of my learning journey I couldn't reconcile two thoughts:
1. Go is built for concurrency 
2. Slices are **independent** views of a contiguous area of memory. When the underlying array needs to be moved (e.g. because it's resized into an another spot) then how does this affect multiple slices?

### Quick Summary 

In summary, I realised that I was expecting Go to protect me from myself like Rust does. Go is different, you're more free. Go let's you shoot yourself in the foot. 

When a slice grows beyond its capacity, its data is copied. 

# Main

Slices are fundamental in Go and yet they are not complicated. In fact, their simplicity is what creates the handful of situations where the result may be a surprise. 

_The Go Blog_'s [Go Slices: usage and internals](https://go.dev/blog/slices-intro) is a great way to learn about slices. *(Firefox says it's a 10-12 minutes read)* 

I divided the issues into two categories:

1. Not letting go 
2. Working with multiple slices explicitly

Both of the behaviors are obvious once you're aware of them, but they're easy to miss when your start. 

## 1. Not letting go

In *Don't let me go* Cigarettes After Sex sing:

> When I was young I thought the world of you<BR>
> You were all that I wanted then<BR>
> It faded and I never saw you again<BR>
> But I won't forget the love we had<BR>
>
> Come to me now<BR>
> Don't let me go<BR>
> Stay by my side<BR>


Slices can be like this. When you work with some data and then you stop working with it you may assume GC will collect it because you're no longer looking at it, but in fact the GC can be prevented from cleaning it up because a slice exists that could theoretically access the data. 

This behavior affects the following operations:
1. Returned slices
2. Ranges
3. In go <=1.21 functions in the slices package, e.g `Delete`, `Replace` 

If the slice contains pointers this issue affects memory (not being cleaned up) and behavior (the elements past len() contain non-zero-value data). For non-pointer types it's mainly about non-zero values left unchanged. 

A great example of this problem from _The Go Blog_'s [Go Slices: usage and internals](https://go.dev/blog/slices-intro)

> ### A possible “gotcha”
> 
> As mentioned earlier, re-slicing a slice doesn’t make a copy of the underlying array. The full array will be kept in memory until it is no longer referenced. Occasionally this can cause the program to hold all the data in memory when only a small piece of it is needed.
> 
> For example, this FindDigits function loads a file into memory and searches it for the first group of consecutive numeric digits, returning them as a new slice.
>
> ```
> var digitRegexp = regexp.MustCompile("[0-9]+")
> 
> func FindDigits(filename string) []byte {
>    b, _ := ioutil.ReadFile(filename)
>    return digitRegexp.Find(b)
> }
> ```
>
>This code behaves as advertised, but the returned []byte points into an array containing the entire file. Since the slice references the original array, as long as the slice is kept around the garbage collector can’t release the array; the few useful bytes of the file keep the entire **contents** in memory.
>
>To fix this problem one can copy the interesting data to a new slice before returning it (...)


### Go 1.22

In go 1.22 the behaviour changes. 

From [Go 1.22 Release Notes](https://go.dev/doc/go1.22)

> Functions that shrink the size of a slice (`Delete`, `DeleteFunc`, `Compact`, `CompactFunc`, and `Replace`) now zero the elements between the new length and the old length.
>

The commint is [slices: zero the slice elements discarded by Delete, DeleteFunc, Comp…](https://github.com/golang/go/commit/e21dc702d54e85381a97259db7deec710108279b) and an example change is from
```
func Delete[S ~[]E, E any](s S, i, j int) S {
	_ = s[i:j] // bounds check

	return append(s[:i], s[j:]...)
}
```
to
```
func Delete[S ~[]E, E any](s S, i, j int) S {
	_ = s[i:j] // bounds check

	oldlen := len(s)
	s = append(s[:i], s[j:]...)
	clear(s[len(s):oldlen]) // zero/nil out the obsolete elements, for GC
	return s
}
```

## Solutions

1. Copy and return only the data that is relevant. 
   * See [A possible “gotcha”](https://go.dev/blog/slices-intro#a-possible-gotcha).
2. Use `slices.Delete` to delete elements and upgrade to 1.22. 
   * See [Go 1.22 Release Notes](https://go.dev/doc/go1.22)
   * See [slices: zero the slice elements discarded by Delete, DeleteFunc, Comp…](https://github.com/golang/go/commit/e21dc702d54e85381a97259db7deec710108279b) 
3. Zero no longer needed elements with `clear()` or `= nil` for elements. 
   * See below

### Zero no longer needed elements

If you're removing elements yourself (i.e. not with using `slices.Delete` then you have to remember to let go of elements explicitly.

For example in [container/heap](https://pkg.go.dev/container/heap)'s priority queue example we can see:

> ```
> func (pq *PriorityQueue) Pop() any {
> 	old := *pq
> 	n := len(old)
> 	item := old[n-1]
> 	old[n-1] = nil  // don't stop the GC from reclaiming the item eventually
> ```

BTW. `= nil` was added in 2024, 12 years after the first commit :)


## 2. Working with multiple slices explicitly 


The *1. Not letting go* section describes scenarios where multiple slices can be involved, but they are transitory: while technically there are multiple slice objects involved, conceptually there is a single view of the data at any time (the slices involved are part of a single lifecycle). 

In this section I describe situations where there are multiple slices looking at the same data on purpose. 

Let's start with a simle slice.

```
s1 := make([]int, 0)
print("s1", &s1)
for i := 0; i < 5; i++ {
  s1 = append(s1, i)
  print("s1", &s1)
}

// Output
s1=[] len=0, cap=0
s1=[0] len=1, cap=1, 0xc0000a4018
s1=[0 1] len=2, cap=2, 0xc0000a4040
s1=[0 1 2] len=3, cap=4, 0xc0000ae020
s1=[0 1 2 3] len=4, cap=4, 0xc0000ae020
s1=[0 1 2 3 4] len=5, cap=8, 0xc0000b8040
```
For brevity, I will omit the print calls from now, unless it's important to show where they are.

<blink>TODO add link to code </blink>

<blink>TODO run the examples once to get consistent addresses </blink>

_BTW. The capacity grows using *2 schema (1,2,4,8) to save allocations. Even with this toy code we can see O(1) "amortized" insert time in action._

### 1. Let's create a new slice.

```
s2: = s1

// Output
s1=[0 1 2 3 4] len=5, cap=8, 0xc0000b4040
s2=[0 1 2 3 4] len=5, cap=8, 0xc0000b4040
```

Both slices:
1. have the same length
2. have the same capacity
3. point at the same array in memory


### 2. let's delete a couple of elements. 

```
// Delete elements at index 1 and 2
s1 = slices.Delete(s1, 1, 3)

// Output
s1=[0 3 4] len=3, cap=8, 0xc0000b4040
s2=[0 3 4 0 0] len=5, cap=8, 0xc0000b4040
```

Observations:
1. Capacities don't change
2. Elements at index 3 and 5 have been zeroed (in go <=1.21 they would have not been zeroed)
3. Both slices point at the same memory; no copying.

### 3. Slice 3 with specified Capacity

Things get interesting when we create a 3rd slice an set it's capacity to the current length. 
This could be done with `s1[0:3:3]` or with `slices.Clip(s1)`.

```
s3 := s1[0:3:3]

// Output
s1=[0 3 4] len=3, cap=8, 0xc0000bc040
s2=[0 3 4 0 0] len=5, cap=8, 0xc0000bc040
s3=[0 3 4] len=3, cap=3, 0xc0000bc040      <- capacity 3
```

Observations:

1. s3 points at the same memory, and if we modify the elements all slices see the changes:

```
s1[0] = 10
s2[1] = 11
s3[2] = 12

// Output
s1=[10 11 12] len=3, cap=8, 0xc0000bc040
s2=[10 11 12 0 0] len=5, cap=8, 0xc0000bc040
s3=[10 11 12] len=3, cap=3, 0xc0000bc040
```

### 4. Let's grow s3

```
s3 = append(s3, 15)

// Output
s1=[10 11 12] len=3, cap=8, 0xc0000bc040
s2=[10 11 12 0 0] len=5, cap=8, 0xc0000bc040
s3=[10 11 12 15] len=4, cap=6, 0xc0000be000
```

Observation:
1. s3 needed to grow beyond its capacity and now it's disconnected from the "original" array.
2. Data was copied.





## Clip 

I left a special place for [slices.Clip](https://pkg.go.dev/slices#Clip) which confused me. 

The documentation for `Clip` is:

> Clip removes unused capacity from the slice, returning s[:len(s):len(s)].

I would understand the method better if it said:

_Creates a new slice with capacity equal to length_

Let's look at a modified official example:
```
a := [...]int{0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}

s := a[:4:10]
clip := slices.Clip(s)

// Output 
s=[0 1 2 3] len=4, cap=10, 0xc0000260a0
clip=[0 1 2 3] len=4, cap=4, 0xc0000260a0
```

There are two observations that are obvious if you think about it, but may lead to :
1. If you Clip and there is another slice attached to the underlying array then the memory will not be cleaned up. 
2. If the new clipped slice needs to grow it will grow in another place. 


Code to illustrate point 2:
```
a := [...]int{0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}

s := a[:4:10]
clip := slices.Clip(s)

print("s", &s)
print("clip", &clip)

clip = append(clip, 22)

print("s", &s)
print("clip", &clip)



// Prints
s=[0 1 2 3] len=4, cap=10, 0xc0000ae000
clip=[0 1 2 3] len=4, cap=4, 0xc0000ae000

s=[0 1 2 3] len=4, cap=10, 0xc0000ae000
clip=[0 1 2 3 22] len=5, cap=8, 0xc0000b6040  <- new address
```

The point here is that this behaviour makes sense, but may lead to surprises if you don't pay attention. 


## Solution 

Know that when a slice grows beyond its capacity, its data is copied. 

At my level, after learning the behaviours shown above, the only solution is to be careful. 

# Summary

Slices are easy to understand, a joy to use, and they don't try to hide the underlying complexity. With the power they give comes the risk of shooting yourself in the foot. 

Beware of your preconceptions. I lazily assumed that since go is garbage-collected and has _[built-in concurrency](https://go.dev/)_ that it comes with rails around sharing data. It's doesn't and it's OK. 

For some of the gotchas shown here the solution is to use library functions but for others paying attention is all you have, at least at my level. 

Finally, now I know that when a slice grows beyond its capacity, its data is copied. 


# References
1. [Go Slices: usage and internals](https://go.dev/blog/slices-intro#a-possible-gotcha)
2. [slices: zero the slice elements discarded by Delete, DeleteFunc, Comp…](https://github.com/golang/go/commit/e21dc702d54e85381a97259db7deec710108279b)
3. Code: TODO
